Hello again.
In this video, we are going to look at condition variables.
A common problem that occurs in many
workplaces, even including software development.
You are ready to start work, but you cannot actually do anything yet because you need something from
someone else.
They need to finish what they are doing or they need to do something or some kind of event needs to occur.
A common solution to this is to have someone such as a foreman or a supervisor who can coordinate the
different workers.
So, for example, if we have person A who is doing some work and person B is waiting for something
from person A.
Then person A finishes their work and then they communicate with the foreman to say that they have
finished what is needed. Then the foreman will signal to person B and then person B can start doing
their work.
And we often get this situation in threaded programs as well, a thread has to wait for another thread
to return some data or to do something or for an event to occur before the first thread can proceed.
If we consider we have a program which is fetching some data over the network.
This could start up some threads.
It could start up one thread, which actually fetches the data.
Another thread which displays a progress bar. This thread will monitor the data as it comes in.
And from time to time, it will update itself. And then another threat which will process the data.
When all the data has been received, the thread that is fetching the data will terminate. The thread
with the progress bar will also terminate.
And then the thread which is going to process this data, will be able to run.
So you might want to pause the video for a moment and think about how you might implement this.
Well, one solution is to use a boolean variable, which will be shared and can be seen by all the threads.
This will be set to true when all the data has been fetched and before that, it will be false.
So the fetching thread will set this to true when it finishes.
And the other threads will check this flag so they can tell with the data has been fetched or not.
Obviously, this will need to be protected by a mutex to avoid a data race, because we can have multiple threads
which are accessing this variable and the possibility of modification.
So we would do this by having loops in the progress bar thread and the processing thread. These will check
the variable and when the variable becomes true, these loops will terminate.
And the progress bar thread will exit and the processing thread will start doing its processing.
This will work and it is thread-safe, but it is not very efficient.
These loops in the waiting threads are going to spin around using up lots of CPU cycles.
And also, while these threads are checking the flag, they will have a lock on the mutex and that will
prevent the fetching thread from setting the flag.
The loops do not have to run flat out. We could put a sleep in them, so we only check every hundred
milliseconds, half a a second, a second, but then you have to decide what is the optimal time to wait.
There is a nicer solution which is supported by C++, and that's something called a condition variable.
When we have two or more threads which have critical sections which are protected by a mutex, a condition
variable will use the mutex to coordinate the threads. In our example, the processing thread
would tell the condition variable that it is waiting.
And then it goes to sleep.
The fetching thread would send a notification to the condition variable that it has finished, and then
the condition variable will wake up the processing thread, which can then run and do its processing.
So it would look something like this.
We have the processing thread, which sends a "wait" message to the condition variable and then goes to sleep.
When the fetching thread finishes, it will send a "notify" message to the condition variable and then
the condition variable will send a "wake up!" message to the processing thread.
The processing thread creates a unique lock instance to lock the mutex. It then calls wait() on the condition
variable.
The condition variable releases the lock and it will block the thread.
So that is why we have to use a unique lock instance, because the condition variable needs to be able
to call unlock(). The fetching thread creates a lock guard instance.
We do not require anything more complicated. And that will give it a lock on the mutex.
Then it fetches the data, it releases the lock and it notifies the condition variable. And then when the
condition variable is notified, it will wake up the processing thread. The processing thread will get a lock
on the mutex,
It will resume execution and it will process the data.
The way that the locks work means that the critical section is always protected.
The critical section in the processing thread is locked until it sleeps.
Then it is locked again when it wakes up and the critical section in the fetching thread is locked all the time
it needs to be. So it may take a while to actually grasp how this all works, but it does work.
So let's look at the C++ conditional variable. It is defined in the  header, there is
a wait() function which takes an argument, which must be a unique lock on a standard mutex.
This will unlock the argument and block the thread until the condition variable gets a notification.
And there are also versions with time outs, wait_for() and wait_until(). If the notification is not
received in time, then the mutex will be relocked.
So you could run that in a loop.
So these functions would be called by the processing thread.
Then there are two functions which would be called by the fetching thread to send the notification.
There is notify_one() which will send a notification to a single waiting thread.
The thread which gets the notification is chosen by the system.
You cannot decide which one it is going to be.
And there is also notify_all() which will send a notification to every thread that is waiting on that condition
variable.
Let's have an example of this. We are going to have something very similar, a reading thread
and a writing thread.
The writing thread is going to modify a shared string and the reading thread is going to stop and wait
until the string has been modified.
And then once the string is modified, the reader will start up again
and it will have access to the new value of the shared string.
We are going to use a condition variable to coordinate these two threads and we are also going to use
a mutex to protect the shared data.
So this is the code that's going to implement this.
We have got the condition variable as a global.
We have got the mutex, which is going to protect the critical sections and this is the shared data that is
going to be modified.
This is the reader thread, the one that is going to wait for the data to be modified.
We create a unique look on the mutex.
Then we call wait() on the condition variable.
We pass the unique lock at its argument.
So that is going to cause the thread to go to sleep. It will unlock the mutex and then the thread will sleep.
In the modifying thread, we lock the mutex ourselves.
Then we modify the data.
So this is our critical section.
We put the lock guard in its own scope so that the lock will be released. And then we notify the condition
variable.
So that is going to send a signal to the condition variable, saying that the data has been modified.
And then below that, we have a thread which will start up a thread.
It also prints out the initial value of the data, just so we can see what is going on.
So there we are.
So we started off by printing out the initial value of the data in main().
Then the writer thread ran, so that
modified the data.
When it had modified it,
it sent a notification.
And then that woke up the reader thread, which printed out the value of the data.
OK, so that's it for this video.
We'll carry on talking about condition variables in the next video, but until then, keep coding!